# NFL Unpredictability

## Introduction 
My data comes from the 2018-2019 NFL Big Data Bowl contest repository on Github. The dataset I used for this project contained play data from every game for the first 6 weeks of the 2017 NFL regular season. The goal of the project is to be able to accurately predict whether or not a play will be a run or a pass based on various factors such as down, first-down distance, distance from endzone, and more. Based on these predictions, if the model predicted pass but the team actually ran the ball, I want to analyze the difference in predicted yards gained from the play and actual yards gained. 
This model’s main purpose is to measure how unpredictable NFL teams are with play calls and if unpredictability can lead to success. The job of an NFL coach is to be unpredictable with their play calls so that the opposite team can’t predict whether the play will be a run or a pass. At the end of the project, I will be able to determine which teams were the most unpredictable over the first 6 weeks, and if being unpredictable led to more success. As far as I have seen, this topic hasn’t been widely researched on a play-by-play level which seems odd since play-calling is a big part of a coach’s job and can really dictate the success of a team if done correctly, or if not done correctly, can become an extreme detriment of the team.
## Data Collection
The dataset used for this project was read directly from the NFL Big Data Bowl’s Github page into R for analysis. The dataset included additional line of scrimmage info such as offensive formation scheme, defensive formation scheme, and description of the play but all of this data comes post play-call so it is not logical to use in the model. The dataset included the home and away teams’ score before and after the play, however it did not include the home or away teams’ name in the dataset, so in order to extract the offensive team’s score I only looked at scoring plays (plays where score before play doesn’t equal score after play) and matched the possession team with the team whose score changed. It made more sense to include the score as one continuous variable in the dataset so only the score difference (offense’s score minus defense’s score) was included in the final dataset. Specific plays had to be excluded from the dataset such as special team plays such as punts and field goals, and set plays such as kickoffs and extra points attempts. The original dataset only included a “yardline” variable that consisted of a number one through 50 and another variable that contained the side of the 50-yardline the offense was on indicated by the team’s name. These two variables were transformed into one continuous variable “yards from endzone” that contained the distance the offense needed to go to reach the endzone. The “game clock” variable stored the time remaining in the quarter; however, this is not easy for the model to analyze so this variable was transformed into a continuous variable that represented the time left remaining in the game. Based off the variable “pass result” which indicated whether the play resulted in a completion “C” or incompletion “I” the new variable “play type” was created to indicate whether the play was a pass, or a run if a value for the pass result variable was missing. 
